Synapse 1.64 (#1395)
matrix-org/matrix.org: gatsby/content/blog/2022/07/2022-08-03-synapse-1.64.mdx

---
date: '2022-08-03'
title: Synapse 1.64 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

It's that time again: there's a new Synapse release, fresh out of the oven!
Let's take a look at what's inside [Synapse
1.64](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.64.0).

## Delegating email verification is now deprecated

[Synapse 1.4.0](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.4.0)
introduced a configuration option (`account_threepid_delegates.email`) to allow
homeservers to delegate validating the ownership of email addresses to an
external identity server. This validation is used by Synapse when adding an
email address to a Matrix account, or before performing a password reset.

As of Synapse 1.64, this option is deprecated, and Synapse will print a warning
if it is used. This is because this option relies on old API endpoints that have
since been

> [removed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/changelog/#identity-service-api) from the

Reviewer: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/changelog/#identity-service-api-1-1 instead, maybe? doesn't matter though.

(`account_threepid_delegates.msisdn`) can still be used, though we expect to
deprecate it in a future release of Synapse.

## Improved TLS support for sending emails

When configuring an SMTP server to use to send out emails to users, server
administrators can configure Synapse to use TLS to communicate to that server.
Until now, only [STARTTLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunistic_TLS) was
supported in this case.

Synapse 1.64 introduces a new `force_tls` configuration option in the `email`
section of the configuration file. If this new setting is set to `true` Synapse
will use TLS for the initial connection rather than upgrading via STARTTLS.

See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
for more information.

## Memory leak in `frozendict`

A couple of weeks ago, we
[identified](https://github.com/Marco-Sulla/python-frozendict/issues/60) a
memory leak within [frozendict](https://pypi.org/project/frozendict/), which is
a library that Synapse relies on. This would in turn cause Synapse instances to
slowly leak memory when processing `/sync` requests.

> We highly encourage server administrators to upgrade their local version of

Reviewer: ... who installed Synapse via `pip` ... ?

Author: Oh yes good point.

---
date: '2022-08-03'
title: Synapse 1.64 released
categories:
- Releases
author: Brendan Abolivier
---

It's that time again: there's a new Synapse release, fresh out of the oven!
Let's take a look at what's inside [Synapse
1.64](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.64.0).

## Delegating email verification is now deprecated

[Synapse 1.4.0](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.4.0)
introduced a configuration option (`account_threepid_delegates.email`) to allow
homeservers to delegate validating the ownership of email addresses to an

> external identity server. This validation is used by Synapse when associating
> email addresses to a Matrix account, or before performing a password reset.

Reviewer: "associating" sounds a bit like 3pid binding, which is separate.

```suggestion
external identity server. This validation is used by Synapse when adding an
email address to a Matrix account, or before performing a password reset.
```

> As of Synapse 1.64, this option is deprecated. This is because this option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of Synapse 1.64, this option is deprecated, and Synapse will print a warning if it is used.
This is because this option
```

relies on old API endpoints that have since been removed from the Matrix

> specification. Server administrators who still need the ability to validate the

Reviewer 2: Can we cross link to the bit of the spec which says that the endpoints are deprecated?

Author: I can do some spelunking but the latest version of the spec doesn't even mention the v1 IS endpoints.

Reviewer 2: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/changelog/#identity-service-api and 	https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2713 are probably what you want

> specification. Server administrators who still need the ability to validate the
> ownership of email addresses must configure an SMTP server in their Synapse
> configuration file. See the [configuration
> guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
> for more information.

Reviewer: How about something like

```suggestion
specification.

Synapse can do this validation internally provided it is configured with
details of an SMTP server. Administrators currently relying on
`account_threepid_delegates.email` should therefore ensure that an
SMTP server is correctly configured, and remove the
`account_threepid_delegates.email` option. See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
for more information.
```

... which I think is a bit of a clearer call to action?

We plan to fully remove this configuration option in Synapse 1.66, which is

> expected to be released in 4 weeks.

Reviewer 2: Can we give a specific date here? 4 weeks could be interpreted as "4 weeks from the posting of this blog".

> Note that the equivalent option to validate the ownership of phone numbers

Reviewer 2: s/equivalent/related or s/equivalent/similar?

Reviewer: equivalent sounds ok to me

(`account_threepid_delegates.msisdn`) can still be used, though we expect to
deprecate it in a future release of Synapse.

## Improved TLS support for sending emails

When configuring an SMTP server to use to send out emails to users, server
administrators can configure Synapse to use TLS to communicate to that server.
Until now, only [STARTTLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunistic_TLS) was
supported in this case, and a long-standing pain point for server administrators
has been the lack of support for implicit TLS (i.e. the use of TLS without a

> STARTTLS upgrade).

Reviewer 2: Is there a relevant hyperlink here to a wikipedia page or RFC we can use?

Should `implicit TLS` be enclosed in scare quotes (`"implicit TLS"`)? We didn't think the naming was very good and used a different name in the config options.

Reviewer 3: maybe put it in `*implicit TLS*` italics.

Implicit TLS is a well-known term amongst SMTP server admins I think, but probably less so everyone else. Trouble is that there isn't a great word for it otherwise either; many people call it 'SSL' as opposed to 'TLS', but that's so wrong I wouldn't want to encourage it :-P.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Mail_Transfer_Protocol#STARTTLS_or_%22Opportunistic_TLS%22 has a bit of context

Reviewer 4: > Implicit TLS

I think we discussed this in the changelog a bit already, but I very much do not think it is a well known term. 😢

Reviewer 3: I have seen the terminology 'Implicit' and 'Explicit' TLS in FTP clients as well.

Maybe to help clarify it you can mention the standard port number which is 465.

Regardless of whether 'Implicit TLS' is a well-known term or not, it's a standard phrase that you can search for and typically the people who actually care about it will know what it means.

Reviewer: agreed. I'm also deeply unconvinced it was a long-standing pain point; STARTTLS is fine for everyone except the one guy who wrote the patch.

Let's drop the second half of this sentence ("and a long-standing...")  and replace the next paragraph with something like 'Synapse 1.64 adds the `force_tls` option, which means it will use TLS for the initial connection rather than upgrading via STARTTLS'.

Author: > I'm also deeply unconvinced it was a long-standing pain point

To clarify this: my reasoning was that the issue has been opened for 2 years and several people have had the same complaint (on the issue, and I think I've seen it mentioned by others in other places?). But happy to drop it.

Synapse 1.64 introduces support for implicit TLS. As of this version of Synapse,
server administrators can set the new configuration option `force_tls` to `true`
in the `email` section of their configuration file.

See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/v1.64/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#email)
for more information. Note that the `require_transport_security` setting of the
`email` section of the configuration file is ignored when implicit TLS is

> enabled.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is worth calling out here. It's kinda obvious.

## Everything else

This version of Synapse introduces support for room version 10! This new room
version enables support for the new `knock_restricted` join rule, to allow
knocking into rooms which are otherwise restricted to members of a specific room
(or space). See [the Matrix specification about room version
10](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/rooms/v10/) for more information.

> Synapse 1.64 features a new rate limiter to limit the rate of joins to the same

Reviewer: This wording makes it sound like we are talking about a *different* version. I know it's difficult to find ways to avoid starting each section with "This version also"... how about:

```suggestion
Additionally, Synapse 1.64 features a new rate limiter to limit the rate of joins to the same
```

room. It is intended as a mitigation against abuse scenarios involving joining a
lot of users from different homeservers to a room to then send spam across it.
See the [configuration
guide](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html#rc_joins_per_room)
for more information.

This release of Synapse also extends the [List
Rooms](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/admin_api/rooms.html#list-room-api)
and [Room
Details](https://matrix-org.github.io/synapse/latest/admin_api/rooms.html#room-details-api)
admin APIs to include the type of a room in responses, allowing server
administrators to differentiate spaces from other rooms.

We also encourage server administrators to upgrade their local version of
[frozendict](https://pypi.org/project/frozendict/) to version 2.3.3 or higher,
as this version fixes a memory leak that occurs during `/sync` requests. The
Docker image `matrixdotorg/synapse` and the Debian packages from

> `packages.matrix.org` already include the updated library.

Reviewer: I feel like we should call this out more?
